---
title: "The whole drama with GPLv3"
categories:
- "Orinnari"
excerpt: "Storytime! Emotional! EXPOSED! The tea is piping hot! Not clickbait!"
---
Last year, I was involved in, or perhaps more accurately, inadvertently instigated a row over how civ-plugins are licenced. This gets brought up and thrown in my face every now and then and I end up frantically and no-doubt inadequately explaining the situation, you know how internet arguments go. I figured I'd write this to tell my side of the story. Before I start, I am not a lawyer, nothing you read here should be construed as legal advice, do NOT make decisions because of what you read on some guy’s blog, you should always seek the advice of a lawyer before making those decisions. I say this not only as a disclaimer, but also convey that, probably like most people, I am not educated or experienced in copyright law.

For the longest time, I had *very* little knowledge of copyright. I knew that pirating a movie was equivalent to stealing a car, handbag, or television, but I wouldn't have been able to tell you what a copyright licence was except to point at product keys. You may remember, back in 2014, [Bukkit was DMCA’d](https://web.archive.org/web/20150207060907/http://dl.bukkit.org:80/dmca/notification.txt) by one of its developers, Wolvereness. I found out about this a little while later. I didn't exactly know what any of the drama meant except that trying to setup a modded server suddenly became more difficult. I remember watching Youtube videos [like this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a2YbcCdxkTo) which framed the issue as a protest against working under false pretences. I didn't consider it any further than that.

Skip forward to 2018 where I had played around with a few copyright licences, mostly [ISC](https://opensource.org/license/isc-license-txt/) since that's what seemingly every NodeJS module uses and I am a sheep. I tried [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/public-domain/cc0/) once or twice but stopped when I heard that public domain is tricky and that many countries do not allow you to waive your copyright entirely. I was content to stick with [MIT](https://opensource.org/license/MIT/) and [ISC](https://opensource.org/license/isc-license-txt/) since their legalese was minimal, mostly readable, and seemed reasonable. At this point, while I knew that GPL was a fairly popular open source licence based on what I saw while browing Githib, I nonetheless couldn't have told you what any of the terms were.

However, this was also the year I received one too many #CodeItYourself’s and started contributing to Civclassic by improving the successful-purchase redstone trigger ([PR](https://github.com/CivClassic/ItemExchange/pull/1)), thinking that I was contributing under its [BSD-3](https://opensource.org/license/bsd-3-clause/) licence. I continued to contribute to Civ for 4 years under that assumption.

But then, in 2022, I happened across a conversation in a civ-development Discord where someone, let's call them Fredrick, mentioned that all of the civ-plugins should technically be licenced under GPL because of Bukkit. Instinctively, I fought back against this... why would that be the case? A licence couldn't require something like that, surely. And why would our plugins not already be licenced that way if that were the case. Many of our elder civ-developers were highly paid professionals, as they frequently liked to remind us, so surely they wouldn't get this wrong. It simply could not be the case.

After a few days though, it had sunk in... Fredrick was right... Bukkit is GPL licenced, and the licence and its [FAQs](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html) say in no uncertain terms that any software which uses Bukkit code must inherit the GPL licence. But it was only when I found out that those same elder civ-developers already knew this that I closed my pending PRs ([eg](https://github.com/CivMC/SimpleAdminHacks/pull/31)). I had this realisation wash over me all at once that I had just spent the past 4 years contributing under false pretences. I knew that it was unlikely in the extreme that we’d get sued for copyright infringement; that even if Bukkit were enforcing their licence, they'd go after premium and closed source projects first. But the principle of it, that professional programmers would knowingly and willingly put amateur programmers like myself in that position, felt like a betrayal of trust. And what did it mean in terms of the plugins and my own contributions?

A few weeks later, it dawned on me that the only way to prevent further misleading of civ-developers would be to correct the licences. And since [BSD-3](https://opensource.org/license/bsd-3-clause/) and [MIT](https://opensource.org/license/MIT/) are permissive licences that permit sublicencing, it should be fine. I had seen this in practice too with PolyMC relicencing into GPL ([reference](https://polymc.org/news/moving-on/)). So, I took the evening to investigate each plugin and open a PR to correct its licence. In hindsight, it would've been smarter to open a single PR on CivModCore and see how it goes rather than inundate the admins and maintainers with 20 odd PR notifications. I quickly realised and tried to keep things as professional as possible, but the others were... less keen to do so. The FactoryMod PR ([reference](https://github.com/CivMC/FactoryMod/pull/27)) was were most of the "discussion" took place, the first response being a thinly-veiled threat to pull a Wolvereness. This amongst the personal attacks in that PR but mostly in Discord had me leaving that Discord for my own mental health. I swore off contributing to civ-plugins until they were correctly licenced.

For a short while, I swore off GPL completely too: the confusion and malcontent caused by its desire to spread like Herpes, I wanted no part in it. This also meant no longer contributing to other projects, like [MapSync](https://github.com/CivPlatform/map-sync), which was disheartening since I was excited about the project. I principally felt that GPL didn't adhere to the principle of freedom since it collapses a developer’s choice to relicence their entire codebase, no matter how big or small, or not use the library at all. In some cases, this could mean having to use other, less supported, less documented, less secure libraries. I still feel that way, though I have softened on standalone GPL software.

Looking back, it’s strange to me that going from one open source licence to another caused so much trouble and bullying. And the people who dredge this drama up aren’t usually doing so for wholesome reasons either. And while I cringe at my staggering ignorance of copyleft licences, I am proud of myself for standing up for what I believe in, even if that means receiving abuse from people I once thought of as colleagues and friends.

---

Update, 26th May 2023: One thing that has occurred to me since writing this is that, while it's true that Bukkit will likely never sue anyone, civ-plugins don't depend on Bukkit, they depend on PaperMC, which is actively developed and has inherited Bukkit's GPL licence. Indeed, I, myself, have contributed patches to PaperMC ([reference](https://github.com/PaperMC/Paper/pull/5583)). When asking for civ-plugins to relicence to GPL, am I not protecting my own work?

That being said, I get the sense that anyone who attempts to wave their copyright around would likely go the way of Wolvereness, ie, be a permanent pariah and have all their patches removed. And would I have to wait until my contributions to PaperMC get used before I have grounds to sue? I'm not actually looking to do this, I'm just pondering to what extent that this is all just a giant farce kept aloft through strategic ambiguity. And in that sense, none of it really matters?

But still, I retain this sense that, at the very least, ensuring that [potential] contributors are informed about the licence ambiguity is the right and moral thing to do.
